
 DEVONSHIRE WITCHES.

 BY PAUL Q. KARKEEK.

 (Read at Teignmouth, July, 1874.)


 _Reprinted from the Transactions of the Devonshire Association for the
 Advancement of Science, Literature, and Art. 1874._




DEVONSHIRE WITCHES.

BY PAUL Q. KARKEEK.

(Read at Teignmouth, July, 1874.)


Devonshire bears powerful evidence to the theory of Mr. Buckle, that
the climate and scenery of a country tend to influence the creed of
the people. Our miles of broad and almost deserted moorland, the deep
valleys, the dark combes, and our stormy iron-bound coasts, may to a
certain extent have inclined the Devonians of the past to a firmer
belief in the miraculous, than would be found in a more populous and
less rugged county. Traces of this are present even now. Although ages
have passed away since unhappy men and women were tried for witchcraft,
there may still be found in the western shires scores who believe
in charms, and who are habitual consultants of the "wise man;" and
sufferers from the evil-eye, or people who have been ill-wished, are
constantly heard of.

Prior to the arrival of James I. our statute-book looked but mildly on
witchcraft. Laws were passed in 1551 and 1562 against this offence, but
it remained for James the Demonologist to bring matters to a climax. In
proportion as the Puritans and their doctrines spread, so increased the
belief in, and prosecution for, witchcraft. This belief partook of the
nature of an epidemic. Suddenly prisoners were seized, tried in various
ways, taken before the magistrates, and sent to the assizes, where
they were but seldom acquitted. Popular opinion having been satisfied,
things resumed their usual course. There was no doubt about the crime;
the same village contained the victims and the person of ill-repute.
The inhabitants could see for themselves the patient whom no physician
could cure, and who pronounced the complaint to be witchcraft; and the
confession of the accused only too plainly confirmed all suspicions.
Next to murder, nothing could be more palpable; and yet, when once
the foundations of this fearful creed were disturbed by rationalism,
the whole fabric was speedily swept away, leaving but few traces to
show how great it had been, and these only in the minds of the most
ignorant classes. Strange to say, there are but few records of the
conviction of witches which were not fully supported by the confessions
of the accused. It is indeed true that these confessions were only too
frequently extorted by gross cruelty, but in scores of cases this was
not needed. The prisoners rejoiced in their crimes, and seemed proud of
their evil reputations. In that awful moment, when, with one foot on
the gallows ladder, and preparing to pay the penalty of their fancied
crimes, they even then would relate, and in glowing colours, their evil
deeds, there could be but small reason for idle boastings then; but so
it was. The witches themselves as firmly believed in their evil powers
as did their accusers and judges. The trials by law were conducted
with all order and fairness. There was no unusual mode of procedure.
In those days justice leaned towards the accuser, and inclined to
punishment; but witchcraft was not an exception, or was treated worse
than murder or theft, and not nearly so badly as heresy. As I said
before, these trials of witches would come in spasms, and with all the
fury of an epidemic. The history of one such epidemic I propose to
relate.

In the year 1682 there lived in the town of Bideford three old women,
poor, ugly, and discontented. One, Temperance Lloyd, pursued the
lucrative occupation of an apple-woman, when she could find any good
citizen rash enough to deal with her. No good housewife would allow
her children to go near her; for she was a witch, and the children
might get under the influence of the evil-eye. Once she had been sent
to the assizes, but was acquitted, much to the disgust of the Bideford
folk. On another occasion she had been dragged before the magistrates
and examined, but let off. It was no light matter to be tried for
witchcraft; but then there was one consolation, nothing could be done
to a witch until she had been forsaken by the devil, her master; so
it was only necessary to try her often enough. She had two companions
in her evil ways; one was Susanna Edwards, who was a witch of a
higher class than old Temperance Lloyd, for she had a pupil, one Mary
Trembles, who had come to an understanding with Susanna Edwards to
learn the art and mystery of witchcraft in all its branches. Things had
been going on very quietly in Bideford for some time. People had died
in unusual ways, and many had suffered without making much ado about
it; but there is an end to all things, and one day the storm broke.
This came about in the following manner:

A certain gentleman, named Thomas Eastchurch, lived in Bideford with
Elizabeth his wife, and Grace Thomas, her maiden sister. Mistress Grace
had been ailing for some time, and had consulted several physicians,
but to no purpose. Her brother did not attach much importance to the
case, and considered she was suffering from natural causes. Doctors in
those days called nervous attacks witchcraft. Some months previous to
the date of our story, Mistress Grace Thomas had recovered sufficiently
well as to be able to go out a little to take the air. While out
she came across Temperance Lloyd, who, to her astonishment, fell on
her knees, and thanked heaven that she was well and out again. Now,
people do not usually go on their knees in the open streets to return
thanks for the recovery of sick folk, even if they are doating old
beggar women. This was suspicious, and coupled with the fact that it
was Temperance Lloyd, the notorious witch, who was so surprisingly
grateful, it caused Mistress Thomas to form a little theory about the
origin of her ailments. That night she became much worse, and lay so
for some months, sometimes better and sometimes worse. At length,
on July 2nd, as she lay a groaning and complaining of her pains,
and particularly of one knee, her sister looked at it, and on close
inspection of the painful joint, discovered nine places like unto the
pricks of a thorn. It needed no great amount of reasoning power to
see that if people have nine prick holes on their knee, they must be
bewitched. Then they recollected the fervent delight exhibited last
September by Temperance Lloyd, and forthwith Dame Eastchurch procured
an interview with that worthy. When asked if she had made any images
of wax or clay for the bewitching of her sister, Temperance replied
in the negative, but owned that she had used a piece of leather for
that purpose. This distinction without a difference was not likely to
avail her anything, and she was at once arrested. The next day, Sunday,
July 3rd, a court of inquisition was opened at the Town-hall, and his
worship the mayor, Mr. Thomas Gist, Alderman John Davies, and the town
clerk, Mr. John Hill, formed the bench before which the case was tried.

Mistress Thomas described very fully the history of her complaint. She
gave all the symptoms; she told about the prickings, and pinchings,
and swoonings in a style that would have satisfied any one; and what
was more, she had lost every pain and ache ever since that Temperance
Lloyd had been locked up.

Then Dame Eastchurch related the discovery of the nine prick-holes, and
of the acknowledgment by the prisoner of using the piece of leather to
bewitch her sister.

The next witness, Ann Wakely, who had been sick nurse to Mistress
Thomas, confirmed the foregoing evidence, even to the magical
disappearance of the pains at the moment of the prisoner's arrest.
Furthermore, she had been commissioned by the mayor to examine the body
of the prisoner, which she had done in company with Honor Hooper and
other matrons, and they had discovered marks of diabolic familiarity
about her. The prisoner, too, had admitted to her that a certain
magpie, which came and fluttered at the window of Mistress Thomas on
Thursday morning last, was the devil himself. Honor Hooper confirmed
all this.

Then Mr. Thomas Eastchurch gave his evidence, which consisted in
retailing a long conversation he had had with the prisoner yesterday,
in which she had confessed to having met the devil in Higher Gunstone
Lane, and that he had tempted her to exercise her craft on Grace
Thomas. The description of the devil is simply that of a hobgoblin. He
was the length of her arm, and wore black clothes; he had broad eyes,
and a mouth like a toad.

Then Temperance Lloyd was called on for her confession, which was given
_ad libitum_. All that the preceding witnesses had said was true, and
in addition she related that on her visits to Mr. Eastchurch's house
she was accompanied by a "braget cat" (the devil in disguise), and that
when she had pricked and pinched her victim, though the room was full
of people, no one had seen her.

Here was enough to hang a dozen witches; but now that she was in a
mood to confess--an evident proof of her desertion by the devil--the
magistrates went into all her other witcheries, and truly they make a
goodly list.

She had been acquitted, though guilty, in 1670 of bewitching William
Herbert to death; and in 1679 she had done to death the daughter of Mr.
Edward Fellow, a gentleman of Bideford.

When finished with by the magistrates, the prisoner was taken to
church, and in the presence of all the witnesses against her was
examined by the rector, Mr. Michael Ogilby. This appears to be a relic
of the old ecclesiastical courts. Here the prisoner adds other trifling
items to her already long list of crimes. She had done to death Jane
Dallyn, and also Lydia Burman. There was some excuse for this last,
inasmuch as the said Lydia Burman had given evidence at the assizes in
1670 that the prisoner had appeared to her in the shape of a red pig,
while she was at work, brewing in the house of Humphrey Ackland, of
Bideford. Then Mr. Ogilby put her to the test of reciting the Lord's
Prayer and the creed, but the prisoner failing to do this to his
satisfaction, "he gave her many good exhortations, and so departed from
her." Such was the evidence against, and the confession of, Temperance
Lloyd. People believed it in those days, but now, alas! _Cuilibet in
sua arte credendum est._

Now, when Temperance was locked up in gaol, she evidently found it
lonely, and so made sufficient observations to her attendants as to
necessitate the arrest of her old cronies, Susanna Edwards and Mary
Trembles. One remark was to the effect that if she was to be hanged,
that Susanna should join her, and at the same time dropping hints about
riding on a red cow, and so on.

On July 18th the same magistrates set to work on Susanna Edwards
and Mary Trembles. A certain Grace Barnes had been taken ill in a
mysterious manner, and to the alarm of her husband and friends. Whilst
the attack lasted, one Agnes Whitfield, who was present, heard some
one at the door, which opening, she found Mary Trembles pretending to
be going to the bakehouse with a white pot in her hands. Grace Barnes
being told who was at the door, cried out that Mary Trembles was one of
them who did torment her; the other was Susanna Edwards, because she
was always coming to her house on some foolish pretence or other. Then
a blacksmith called William Edwards reports a conversation of Susanna
Edwards, showing that she and Mary Trembles had been trying their
art on Grace Barnes. One of the informants was Joane Jones, who was
probably the female watcher at the prison, because she gives evidence
of conversations overheard between Mary Trembles and Susanna Edwards
while in prison.

A curious scene took place before the magistrates on this occasion.
Anthony Jones, husband of the last witness, was standing by the side
of Susanna Edwards, and seeing her to twist her fingers about, said,
"Thou devil, thou art tormenting some person or other!" This enraged
the old woman, who looked at him and said, "Well enough I'll fit thee."
The evidence of Grace Barnes being required, a constable and the man
Jones are sent to fetch her; and as they are bringing her with much
ado into the court, Susanna catches the eye of the officious Mr.
Jones, who forthwith falls down in a fit, and is described as having
"leapt and capered like a madman, and fell a shaking, quivering, and
groaning, and lay for the space of half an hour like a dying or dead
man." Then follows the examination of Mary Trembles, who pleads guilty
to everything and anything. She had been enlisted to the cause of
witchcraft by Susanna Edwards, and had been promised by her "never to
want for money, drink, or clothes;" that the devil had appeared to
her like a Lyon, and that she and Susanna had bewitched Grace Barnes
because the latter had refused them some bread.

Susanna Edwards, in her confession, said that she had made the
acquaintance of the devil two years ago in Parsonage Close, and that
he was like a gentleman. She met him again the same day in Stambridge
Lane, and that he again persuaded her to kill Grace Barnes. She had
bewitched one Dorcas Coleman, and finally owned that "she gave herself
to the devil when she did meet him in Stambridge Lane, and that the
said Mary Trembles was a servant to her, in like manner as she,
this examinant, was a servant to the devil (whom she called by the
appellation of a gentleman)."

Another case was gone into against Susanna Edwards on July 26th, but it
merely confirmed her confession, which was hardly necessary.

These miserable old women were, on this evidence and these confessions,
sent to Exeter, where they, on August 18th, were tried, found guilty,
and condemned to be hanged; and which sentence was carried out on the
25th of the same month at Heavitree, as we are informed in Jenkin's
_History of Exeter_.

Even at the foot of the gallows they stuck to their story, altering it
but little, though they were much questioned by a meddlesome Mr. Hann,
"who was a minister in those parts." In a curious tract published in
London this same year (1682), which I have appended to this, with a
copy of the deposition taken at the magistrates' enquiry, there is a
statement that Mary Trembles was very loath to be hanged, and in order
to get her to the place of execution was strapped on a horse.

It is commonly supposed that this was the last execution for witchcraft
in England; but such is not the case. In 1716 a woman and her daughter
were hanged at Huntingdon for selling their souls to the devil. Twenty
years after, in 1736, the penal act of James I. was erased from the
statute-book. The judges of the land were among the first to set their
faces against these judicial murders; one of the earliest being Mr.
Chief Justice Holt, who on all occasions endeavoured to procure an
acquittal.

There is a letter among the State papers from Lord Keeper North, who
was at Exeter on circuit at these assizes, to Sir Leoline Jenkins,
which gives an excellent view of the question as then considered. It
is dated Exeter, August 19th, 1682. "Here have been three old women
condemned for witchcraft; your curiosity will make you enquire of the
circumstances. I shall only tell you that what I had from my brother
Raymond, before whom they were tried, that they were the most old,
decrepid, despicable, miserable creatures that he ever saw. A painter
would have chosen them out of the whole country for figures of that
kind to have drawn by.

"The evidence against them was very full and fanciful, but their
own confessions exceeded it. They appeared not only weary of their
lives, but to have a great deal of skill to convict themselves. Their
description of the sucking devills with sawcer-eyes was as natural that
the jury could not chuse but beleeve them. Sir, I find the country so
fully possessed against them, that though some of the _virtuosi_ may
think these the effect of confederacy, melancholy, or delusion, and
that young folkes are altogether as quick-sighted as they who are old
and infirme; Yet wee cannot repreive them without appearing to denye
the very being of witches, which, as it is contrary to law, so I think
it would be ill for his Majesties service, for it may give the faction
occasion to set afoot the old trade of witchfinding that may cost many
innocent persons their lives, which the justice will not prevent."

Though this was the last execution for witchcraft in the West, it was
not the last trial. In 1695 a woman named Mary Guy was tried before
Chief Justice Holt, at Launceston Castle, for bewitching Philadelphia
Row. In this case the victim vomited pins, straws, and feathers; but,
owing to a successful appeal, by the judge to the jury, a verdict of
acquittal was brought in.

In 1696 Elizabeth Horner was tried before this same judge at Exeter,
and though evidence of a startling nature was given by the children of
a Mr. William Bovet, the jury acquitted her; a result brought about no
doubt by the exertions of the judge. This case of Elizabeth Horner was
the last tried in Devonshire, and with her acquittal was heard the last
of Devonshire witches in courts of justice.




APPENDIX.--No. I.


A True and Impartial Relation of the Information against Three Witches
who were indicted, arraigned, and convicted at the Assizes holden for
the county of Devon, at the Castle of Exon, August 14th, 1682, with
their several Confessions, &c. &c.[1]

[Footnote 1: It is easy to see that some of these depositions are
placed out of order. The first three should be the last. Compare dates.]

DEVON.--The information of Dorcas Coleman, the wife of John Coleman,
of Biddiford aforesaid, Mariner, taken upon her oath, before Thomas
Gist, Mayor of the Burrough Town and Manor of Biddiford, and John
Davies, Alderman, etc., on the 26th of July, Anno Domini 1682. The
said informant upon her oath saith, That about the end of the month
of August in the year 1680, she was taken in tormenting pains, by
pricking in her arms, stomach, and heart, in such a manner as she
never was taken before. Upon which she, this informant, did desire one
Thomas Bremincom to repair unto Dr. Beare for some remedy for those
pains. And shortly afterwards the said Dr. Beare did repair unto this
informant. And upon view of her body, he did say that it was past his
skill to ease her of her pains, for he told her that she was bewitched.
And further saith, that at the time of her tormenting pains, she did
see her, the said Susanna Edwards, in her chamber; and that she this
informant would point with her finger at what place in the chamber the
said Susanna Edwards would stand, and where she would go. And further
saith, that she hath continued so ever since more or less every week.
And saith that when the said Susanna was apprehended concerning Grace
Barnes of Biddiford aforesaid, that this informant did go to see the
said Susanna: and that when the said Susanna was in prison she did
confess unto this informant, that she had bewitched her and done her
some bodily harm by bewitching her. And thereupon she fell down on her
knees and desired this informant to pray for her, the said Susanna
Edwards.

The Information of Thomas Bremincom of Biddiford in the county
aforesaid, gent., taken, etc., the 26th of July AD 1682. The said
informant upon his oath saith, that about two years ago, Dorcas
Coleman, the wife of John Coleman of Biddiford aforesaid, mariner, was
taken very sick, and in her sickness this informant did repair unto one
Dr. Beare for some remedy for these pains. The said Mr. Beare being
come unto her, and upon view of her body, did say that it was past his
skill to ease her, by reason that she was bewitched. And further saith
that after the said Mr. Beare had left her, he this informant did see
one Susanna Edwards, of Biddiford aforesaid widow, to come into her
chamber to visit her the said Dorcas. This informant further saith,
That as soon as the said Dorcas did see the said Susanna Edwards, she
did strive to fly in her face; but was not able to get out of the chair
wherein she sate. This informant and John Coleman, the said Dorcas'
husband did strive to help her out of the chair: upon which the said
Susanna began to go backwards to go out of the chamber. And further
said, that when the said Susanna was almost gone out of the chamber the
said Dorcas did slide out of the chair upon her back, and so strive
to go after the said Susanna. But this informant and her said husband
seeing her in such a sad condition did endeavour to take her up from
the ground, but could not until the said Susanna was gone down over
the stairs. This informant further saith, that at the same time of her
tormenting pains, and when she could neither see nor speak, by reason
that her pains were so violent upon her, this informant hath seen her
the said Dorcas, to point with her hand which way the said Susanna was
gone. And saith that immediately after he hath gone out at the fore
door, and hath seen the said Susanna to go the same way that the said
Dorcas did point with her hand.

The Information of John Coleman of Biddiford, in the County aforesaid,
Mariner, taken, etc. the 26th July 1682. The said informant upon his
oath saith--That Dorcas Coleman his wife, has been a long time sick,
in a very strange and unusual manner; and he hath sought far and near
for remedy, and saith that one Dr. George Beare being advised with
concerning her sickness in this deponent's absence (whilst he was
at sea) the said Mr. Beare hath (as this Informant was told by his
said wife and his uncle Thomas Bremincom, at his return) said that
it was past his skill to prescribe directions for her cure, because
the said Dorcas was bewitched. This informant further saith, that
about three months last past, his said wife was sitting in a chair,
and being speechless, he this informant did see one Susanna Edwards,
of Biddiford, to come into the chamber under a pretence to visit
her.--Whereupon this Informant's wife did strive to come at her the
said Susanna, but could not get out of the chair, upon which this
informant and the said Thomas Bremincom did endeavour to help her out
of the chair, and the said Susanna did go towards the chamber door.
And further saith, That when the said Susanna was come at the chamber
door, she the said Dorcas (remaining speechless as aforesaid) did
slide out of the chair upon her back, and so strove to come at her the
said Susanna, but was not able to rise from the ground, until the said
Susanna was gone down the stairs; and further saith, That the said
Dorcas continued in such a strange and unusual manner of sickness ever
since unto this day with some intermissions.

The Information of Grace Thomas, of Biddiford in the County aforesaid,
Spinster, taken upon her oath the 3rd day of July, A.D. 1682 before
us. The said informant upon her oath saith, that upon or about the
second day of February which was in the year of our Lord 1680, this
informant was taken with great pains in her head, and all her limbs,
which pains continued on her till near or upon 1st day of August then
following; and then this Informant's pains began to abate, and this
Informant was able to walk abroad to take the air: But in the night
she was in much pain and not able to take her rest. This Informant
further saith, That upon or about the 30th day of September now last
past this informant was going up the High Street of Biddiford, when
this informant met with Temperance Lloyd of Biddiford aforesaid, widow,
and she the said Temperance did then and there fall down on her knees
to this Informant and wept--saying "Mrs. Grace, I am glad to see you
so strong again." Upon which this informant said, "Why dost thou weep
for me?" Unto which the said Temperance replied, "I weep for joy to
see you so well again," as the said Temperance then pretended. This
Informant further saith--That that night she, this informant, was taken
very ill with sticking and pricking pains as tho' pins and awls had
been thrust into her body, from the crown of her head to the soles of
her feet; and this informant lay as though it had been upon a rack.
And saith, that these pricking pains have continued upon her body ever
since; and that her pains are much worse by night than by day. This
informant further saith, That on Thursday 1st of June last in the
night, she the Informant was bound and seemingly chained up with all
her sticking pains in her belly; so that on a sudden her belly was as
big as two bellies, which caused her to cry out, "I shall die;" and in
this sad condition this Informant lay as though she had been dead for
a long space (which those persons that were in the chamber with her,
this informant did compute to be about two hours). And this Informant
further saith, that on Friday night last, being the 30th of June, this
Informant was again pinched and pricked to the heart with such cruel
thrusting pains in her head, shoulders, arms, hands, thighs and legs,
as tho' the flesh would have been then immediately torn from the woman
with a man's fingers and thumbs. And further saith--That she was even
plucked out over her bed, and lay in this condition for the space of
three hours (as she was informed by some of those persons then in the
chamber). This Informant further saith that upon the 1st day of this
instant July, as soon as the aforesaid Temperance Lloyd was apprehended
and put in the prison of Biddiford, she this Informant immediately felt
her pricking and sticking pains to cease and abate. And saith--that
she hath continued so ever since unto this time, but is still in great
weakness of body. And further saith, that she believeth that the said
Temperance Lloyd hath been an instrument of doing much hurt and harm
to her body, by pricking and tormenting of her in manner as before set
forth.

The Information of Elizabeth Eastchurch wife of Thomas Eastchurch of
Biddiford, Gent., taken upon her oath, etc., the 3rd of July, A.D.
1682. The said informant upon her oath saith--That upon the 2nd day
of this instant July the said Grace Thomas then lodging in this
informant's said husband's house and hearing of her to complain of
great pricking pains in one of her knees, she this informant did see
her said knee, and observed that she had nine places in her knee which
had been prickt, and that every of the said pricks were as tho' it
had been the prick of a thorn. Whereupon this Informant upon the same
2nd of July did demand of the said Temperance Lloyd, whether she had
any wax or clay in the form of a picture whereby she had pricked and
tormented the said Grace Thomas. Unto which the said Temperance made
answer that she had no wax or clay, but confessed that she had only a
piece of leather which she had pricked nine times.

The Information of Anne Wakely, wife of William Wakely of Biddeford,
Husbandman, taken the 3rd of July, A.D. 1682. The said informant upon
her oath saith, That upon the 2nd of July Instant, she this deponant by
order of Mr. Mayor did search the body of the said Temperance Lloyd, in
the presence of Honor Hooper, and several other women. And upon search
of her said body, she this informant did find in her secret parts,
two teats, hanging nigh together like unto a piece of flesh that a
child had suckt. And that each of the said teats was about an inch in
length. Upon which this Informant did demand of her the said Temperance
whether she had been suckt at that place by the Black Man? meaning the
Devil. Whereto the said Temperance did acknowledge that she had been
suckt there often times by the Black Man, and the last time she was
suckt by the said Black Man, was the Friday before she was searched,
viz the 30th of June last. And this Informant saith, that she had been
attendant of the said Grace Thomas about six weeks last past; and that
on Thursday, the 29th June last in the Morning, she this informant did
see some thing in the shape of a Magpie to come at the Chamber window
where the said Grace did lodge. Upon which this Informant did demand
of the said Temperance whether she did know of any bird to come and
flutter at the said window. Unto which question the said Temperance
did then say, that it was the Black Man in the shape of a bird; and
that she the said Temperance was at that time by the said Thomas
Eastchurch's door of the house where the said Grace Thomas did lodge.

The like is deposed by Honor Hooper, servant unto the said Thomas
Eastchurch, as appears by her information taken upon her oath the day
and year above said before the said Thomas Gist, Mayor and John Davies,
Alderman of Biddiford.

Temperance Lloyd--her examination taken the 3rd of July A.D. 1682.

The said informant being brought before us by some of the constables of
the said borrough, upon the complaint of Thomas Eastchurch of Biddiford
aforesaid, gent, and charged upon suspicion of having used some Magical
art, sorcery, or witchcraft upon the body of Grace Thomas of Biddiford,
spinster; and to have had discourse or familiarity with the Devil in
the shape of a Black man; and being demanded how long since she had
discourse or familiarity with the Devil in the likeness of a Black
man, saith--That about the 30th of September last she met the Devil
in the likeness of a Black man about the middle of the afternoon of
that day, in a certain street or lane in the town of Biddiford, called
Higher Gunstone Lane, and then and there he did tempt and solicit her
to go with him to the house of the said Thomas Eastchurch to torment
the body of the said Grace Thomas, which this examinant at first did
refuse to do, but afterwards by the temptation and persuasion of the
Devil she did go to the house of the said Thomas Eastchurch, and that
she went upstairs after the said black man, and confesseth that both
of them went up into the chamber where the said Grace Thomas was, and
that there they found one Anne Wakely, the wife of William Wakely of
Biddiford, rubbing and stroking one of the arms of the said Grace
Thomas. And the said Examinant doth further confess that she did then
and there pinch with the nails of her fingers the said Grace Thomas,
in her shoulders, arms, thighs, and legs, and that afterwards they
came down into the street together; and that there this examinant did
see something in the form of a grey or braget cat; and saith that the
said cat went into the said Thomas Eastchurch shop. The said Examinant
being further demanded, whether she went any more unto the said Thomas
Eastchurch house, saith and confesseth that the day following she came
again to the said Thomas Eastchurch's house invisible and was not seen
by any person; but there this examinant did meet with the braget cat
as aforesaid, and the said cat did retire and leap back into the said
Thomas Eastchurch's shop. The said Examinant being further demanded
when she was at the said Thomas Eastchurch the last time, saith that
she was there upon Friday the 30th of June last, and that the Devil
in the shape of the said Black man was there with her; and that they
went up again into the said chamber, where she found the said Grace
Thomas lying on her bed in a very sad condition, notwithstanding which
she this examinant and the said black man did torment her again: and
saith and confesseth that she this examinant had almost drawn her out
of her bed, and that on purpose to put the said Grace out of her life.
And further saith that the Black man (or rather the Devil) did promise
this examinant, that no one should discover her. And confesseth that
the said Black man or the Devil did suck her teats, which she now hath
in her secret parts: and that she did kneel down to him in the street,
as she was returning to her own house and after that they had tormented
the said Grace Thomas in manner as last above mentioned. Being demanded
of what stature the said Black man was, said, that he was about the
length of her arm and that his eyes were very big, and that he hopt or
leapt in the way before her; and afterwards did suck her again as she
was lying down, and that his sucking was with great pain unto her,
and afterwards vanished clear away out of her sight. This Examinant
does further confess that upon the first of June last, whilst the said
Mr. Eastchurch and his wife were absent, that she did pinch and prick
the said Grace Thomas with the aid and help of the Black man in her
belly, stomach, and breast, etc., and that they continued so tormenting
of her, about the space of two or three hours, with an intent to have
killed her. And further saith that at the same time she did see the
said Anne Wakely, rubbing and chafing of several parts of the said
Grace Thomas, her body; although the said Anne being present at the
taking of this examination doth affirm that she did not see the said
examinant.

Whereas the said Temperance Lloyd hath made such an ample confession
and declaration concerning the said Grace Thomas, we the said Mayor and
Justice were induced to demand of her some other questions concerning
other Witcheries which she had practiced upon the bodies of several
other persons within this Town; viz.--

She the said examinant did confess that about the 14th of March, in
the year 1670, she was accused, indicted, and arraigned for practising
Witchcraft upon the body of William Herbert, late of Biddiford,
husbandman; and that altho' at the trial of her life at the Castle
of Exeter, she was there acquitted by the Judge and Jury then; yet
this Examinant does now confess that she is guilty thereof, by the
persuasion of the Black man and that she did prick the same William
Herbert unto death.

And whereas upon or about the 15th of May, in the year 1679, she was
accused before the then Mayor and Justices of the town of Biddiford
aforesaid, for practising witchcraft upon the body of Anne Fellow, the
daughter of Edward Fellow of Biddiford, gent, and although her body was
then searched by four women of the town of Biddiford, and the proofs
then against her not so clear and conspicuous the said Mr. Fellow did
not further prosecute against her--yet this examinant doth now confess,
that the said Black man or Devil with her, this examinant did do some
bodily hurt to the said Anne Fellow, and that thereupon the said Anne
did shortly die and depart this life.

Whereas we Thomas Eastchurch and Elizabeth Eastchurch his wife, Honor
Hooper and Anne Wakely, upon yesterday which was the 3rd of July
1682, did give in our several informations upon our oaths, before
Thomas Gist, Mayor, and John Davies, Alderman, two of his Majesties
Justices of the Peace within the Burrough, etc., of Biddiford, against
Temperance Lloyd, for using and practising witchcraft upon the body
of Grace Thomas, as by our several examinations it doth appear: But
because we were dissatisfied in some particulars concerning a piece of
leather, which the said Temperance confessed of unto the said Elizabeth
Eastchurch and we conceiving that there might be some enchantment used
in or about the same leather; Therefore upon this present 4th of July
we with the leave of Mr. Mayor did bring the said Temperance into the
Parish Church of Biddiford, in the presence of Mr. Michael Ogilby,
rector of the same parish church, and divers other persons, where the
said Temperance was demanded by the said Mr. Ogilby, how long since the
Devil did tempt her to do evil. Whereupon she did confess, that about
twelve years ago, she was tempted by the Devil, to be instrumental to
the death of William Herbert. And that the Devil did promise her, that
she should live well and do well. And she did then also confess that
she was an instrument of the death of the said William Herbert. And as
to the said Grace Thomas, she further confessed, that on Friday the
23rd of June last; she the said Temperance, came into the said Thomas
Eastchurch's shop, in the form of a cat, and fetcht out of the same
shop, a puppet or picture (commonly called a child's baby) and that
she carried the same into the chamber where the said Grace did lodge
and left it about the bed: where the said Grace did lie; but would
not confess that she had prickt any pins in the said puppet, or baby
picture, altho she were demanded particularly that question by the said
Mr. Ogilby. Also the said Temperance did then confess That she was the
cause of the death of Anne Fellow, the daughter of Edward Fellow.--Also
she did then confess that she was the cause of the death of one Jane
Dallyn, wife of Symon Dallyn of Biddiford, mariner, by pricking her
in one of her eyes, which she did so secretly perform that she was
never discovered or punished for the same. Also the said Temperance
did confess and declare that she did bewitch unto death one Lydia
Burman of Biddiford, spinster, because she had been a witness against
her, at the trial for her life, at the Assizes when she was arraigned
for the death of the said William Herbert, and had deposed that the
said Temperance had appeared to her in the shape of _a red pig_ at
such times as she the said Lydia was brewing in the house of Humphrey
Ackland of Biddiford. Being further demanded in what part of the house
of the said Mr. Eastchurch, or in what part of the bed whereon the said
Grace Thomas lay, she left the puppett above mentioned, saith, That she
would not, nor must not discover, for if she did discover the same that
the devil would tear her in pieces.

And afterwards Mr. Ogilby desired her to say the Lord's prayer and
her creed; which she imperfectly performing he did give her many good
exhortations, and so departed from her. In witness whereof, we have
hereunto set our hands, this 4th day of July Anno Domini 1682.

The information of Thomas Eastchurch of Biddiford, gent, taken the 3rd
of July A.D. 1682. The said informant upon his oath saith, that upon
yesterday, which was 2nd of July, he did hear the said Temperance Lloyd
say and confess, that about the 30th of September last, as she was
returning from the bakehouse with a loaf of bread under her arm towards
her own house, she did meet with some thing in the likeness of a black
man in the street called Higher Gunstone Lane, within this town, and
then and there the said black man did tempt and persuade her to go
to this Informant's house, to torment one Grace Thomas, who is this
informant's Sister in law. That the said Temperance did first refuse
the temptation, saying that the said Grace Thomas had done her no harm.
But afterward, by the further persuasion of the said black man, she
did go to this informant's house and that she went up stairs after the
said blackman: and confessed that both of them went into the chamber
where the said Informant's said sister in law was, and that there they
found Anne Wakely rubbing one of the arms of the said Grace Thomas. And
this informant further saith--That the said Temperance did also confess
that the Blackman did persuade her to pinch the said Grace in the knee,
arms and shoulders, intimating with her fingers how she did it. And
that when she came down stairs into the street, she saw a braget cat go
into the Informant's Shop, and that she believed it to be the Devil.
And this Informant did hear the said Temperance confess that on Friday
night last, the Black man did meet with her near her own door about ten
of the clock and there did again tempt her to go to this Informant's
house and to make an end of the said Grace Thomas. Whereupon the said
Temperance did go to this Informant's house with the black man, and
that she did prick and pinch the said Grace Thomas again in several
parts of her body, declaring with both her hands how she did it. And
that thereupon the said Grace did cry out terribly. And confessed that
the said black man told her that she should make an end of the said
Grace Thomas. And further did confess, that the black man did promise
her that no one should discover her or see her. And she also confessed
that about 12 of the clock that same night that same black man did
suck her in the street, she kneeling down to him. That he had blackish
clothes and was about the length of her arm. That he had broad eyes
and a mouth like a toad, and afterwards vanisht clear away out of her
sight. This informant further saith that he heard the said Temperance
confess, that about the 1st of June last the said black man was with
her again, and told her that on that night she should make an end of
the said Grace Thomas; and confessed that she had griped the said Grace
in her belly, stomach and breast and clipt her to the heart. And that
the said Grace did cry out pitifully. And that the said Temperance was
about the space of two hours tormenting her. And that Anne Wakely (with
several other women) were then in the chamber but could not see the
said Temperance: and that the black man stood by her in the same room.
This informant further saith, that he supposed that the said Grace
Thomas in her sickness had been afflicted through a distemper arising
from a natural cause and did repair to several physicians but that she
could never receive any benefit prescribed by them.

The Information of William Herbert of Biddiford blacksmith taken the
12th of August A.D. 1682.

This Informant upon his oath saith, that near or upon the 2nd of
February in the year 1670 he did hear his father William Herbert
declare on his death bed that Temperance Lloyd of Biddiford widow had
bewitched his said father unto death. This Informant's father further
declaring to this informant that he with the rest of his relations
should view his father's body after his decease and that by his body
they should see what prints and marks the aforesaid Temperance had
made upon his body. And saith that his father did lay his blood to the
charge of the said Temperance Lloyd, and desired this informant to see
her apprehended for the same; which was accordingly done, and saith
that she was accused for the same, but that she was acquitted at the
Assizes. This informant further saith, that upon the 4th of July last,
he went to the prison of Biddiford, where the said Temperance was, and
demanded of her, whether she had done any bodily harm unto the said
William Herbert deceased; unto which she answered "Surely, William,
I did kill thy father." This informant did demand of her further
whether she had done any hurt to one Lydia Burman late of Biddiford,
unto which the said Temperance answered that she was the cause of her
death. This informant demanded of her, why she had not confessed so
much when she was in prison last time? She answered that her time was
not expired, for the Devil had given her greater power for a longer
time. And this informant did hear the said Temperance confess that she
was the cause of the death of Ann Fellow, daughter of Edward Fellow of
Biddiford, gent. And also that she the said Temperance was the cause of
the bewitching out of one of the eyes of Jane wife of Symon Dallyn of
Biddiford, Mariner.

The information of John Barnes of Biddiford, yeoman, taken the 18th of
July A.D. 1682.

The said informant upon his oath saith, that upon Easter Tuesday,
which was the 18th of May last, this Informant's wife, Grace Barnes,
was taken with very great pains of sticking and pricking in her arms,
stomach and breast, as tho' she had been stabbed with awls being so
described unto him by the said Grace in such a manner as this Informant
thought she would have died immediately; and in such sad condition she
had continued to this present day in tormenting and grievous pains.
And further saith, that upon Sunday last, which was the 16th of July
instant, about 10 of the clock in the forenoon, this Informant's said
wife was taken worse than before, insomuch as four men and women could
hardly hold her. And at that time one Agnes Whitefield, wife of John
Whitefield of Biddiford, cordwainer, being in this Informant's house
and hearing some body at the door, she did open the door where she
found one Mary Trembles of Biddiford, single woman, standing with a
white pot in her hand, as though she had been going to the common
bakehouse. And thereupon this Informant's wife did ask of the said
Agnes, who it was that was at the door? Unto which the said Agnes
answered that it was Mary Trembles. Then this Informant's wife said
that she, the said Mary Trembles was one of them that did torment her,
and that she was come now to put her the said Grace out of her life.

The Information of Grace Barnes, the wife of John Barnes of Biddiford,
yeoman, taken the 2nd of August, Anno Domini 1682. The said Informant
upon her oath saith, that she had been very much pain'd and tormented
in her body these many years last past insomuch that she had sought
out for remedy far and near and never had any suspicion that she had
magical art or witchcraft used upon her body until about a year and
half ago, that she was informed by some physicians that it was so. And
further saith thereupon she had some suspicions of one Susanna Edwards
of Biddiford, widow, because that the said Susanna would oftentimes
repair to this Informant's house upon frivolous or no occasion at all.
And further saith that about the middle of May last she was taken with
very great pains of sticking and pricking in her arms, breast, and
heart as though divers awls had been prick'd or stuck into her body,
and was in great tormenting pains for many days and nights together
with very little intermission. And saith that upon Sunday the 16th of
July last, she was taken in a very grievous and tormenting manner; at
which instant of time one Agnes Whitefield, the wife of John Whitefield
of Biddiford, was in this Informant's house, who opening the door and
looking out found one Mary Trembles of Biddiford standing before the
door. And thereupon this informant did ask of the said Agnes, who it
was that stood at the door? who answered that it was the said Mary
Trembles. Upon which this informant was fully assured that the said
Mary Trembles, together with the said Susanna Edwards, were the very
persons that had tormented her by using some magical art or witchcraft
upon her body as aforesaid.

The Information of William Edwards, of Biddiford, blacksmith, taken the
18th of July, Anno Dom. 1682.

The said Informant upon his oath saith, that upon the 17th of July
inst. this informant did hear Susanna Edwards confess, that the Devil
had carnal knowledge of her body; and that he had suck'd her in her
breast. And further saith that he did hear the said Susanna to say,
that she and one Mary Trembles of Biddiford did appear hand in hand
invisible in John Barnes' house of Biddiford, where Grace the wife of
the said John Barnes did lie in a very sad condition. And further saith
that he did then also hear the said Susanna to say, that she and the
said Mary Trembles were at that time come to make an end of the said
Grace Barnes.

The Information of Joane Jones, the wife of Anthony Jones of Biddiford,
husbandman, taken the 18th of July, Anno Dom. 1682. The said informant
upon her oath, saith that upon the 18th of July she this informant
being present with Susanna Edwards of Biddiford, widow, there came to
see the said Susanna one John Dunning, of Great Torrington, which said
John Dunning this Informant did hear him to demand of the said Susanna
how and by what means she became a witch. Unto which question the said
Susanna did answer, that she did never confess afore now, but now she
would. And further saith, that she did hear the said Susanna confess
unto the said John Dunning that she was on a time out gathering of
wood, at which time the said Susanna did see a gentleman to draw nigh
unto her: whereupon she was in good hopes to have a piece of money
of him. This Informant further saith that the said John Dunning did
demand of the said Susanna where she did meet with the said gentleman;
she did answer that it was in Parsonage Close. And further saith, that
after the said John Dunning was gone, this Informant did hear the said
Susanna confess, that on Sunday the 16th inst. she with Mary Trembles
and by the help of the Devil, did prick and torment Grace the wife of
John Barnes of Biddiford, and this informant further saith that she
did hear the said Susanna Edwards and Mary Trembles say and confess
that they did this present day torment and prick her the said Grace
Barnes: and further saith that she did hear the said Mary Trembles say
unto the said Susanna Edwards "O thou Rogue, I will now confess all:
for 'tis thou that hast made me to be a witch and thou art one thyself
and my conscience must swear it." Unto which the said Susanna replied,
"I did not think thou would have been such a Rogue to discover it."
And further saith that the said Susanna did confess that the Devil
did oftentimes carry about her spirit. And further saith that she did
hear the said Susanna say and confess that she did prick and torment
Dorcas Coleman the wife of John Coleman of Biddiford, mariner. And
further saith that she did hear the said Susanna Edwards to confess
that she was suckt in her breast several times by the Devil in the
shape of a boy, lying by her in her bed and that it was very cold unto
her. And this Informant further saith that her husband observing the
said Susanna to gripe and twinkle her hands upon her own body, said
unto her, "Thou Devil, thou art now tormenting some person or other."
Whereupon the said Susanna was displeased with him, and said, "Well
enough I'll fit thee;" and that present time the said Grace Barnes
was in great pain with prickings and stabbings in her heart, as she
did afterwards affirm. This informant further saith that one of the
Constables and her said husband with some others were sent by Mr.
Mayor to bring the said Grace Barnes unto the Town Hall of Biddiford
aforesaid, which they did accordingly do, and immediately as soon as
he with others had led and with much ado brought the said Grace Barnes
into the town-hall, the said Susanna Edwards turned about and looked
upon her said husband, and forthwith this informant's husband was taken
in a very sad condition, as he was leading and supporting the said
Grace Barnes up the stairs of the said Town-hall, before the Mayor and
Justices; insomuch that he cried out, "Wife I am now bewitched by this
Devil" meaning Susanna Edwards; and forthwith leapt and capered like
a madman and fell a shaking, quivering and groaning, and lay for the
space of half an hour like a dying or dead man. And at length coming to
his senses again did declare unto this Informant, that the said Susanna
Edwards had bewitched him. And this Informant further saith, that she
did never knew her said husband to be taken in any fits or convulsions,
but a person of a sound and healthy body ever since he had been this
Informant's husband.

The Information of Anthony Jones of Biddiford, Husbandman, taken the
19th of July A.D. 1682. The said informant upon his oath saith, that
yesterday whilst the said Susanna Edwards was in the Town-hall of
Biddiford concerning the said Grace Barnes he did observe the said
Susanna to gripe and twinkle her hands upon her own body, in an unusual
manner: whereupon the said Susanna was displeased with this informant,
and said, "Well enough I will fit thee." And at that present time the
said Grace Barnes was in great pains with prickings and stabbings unto
her heart as the said Grace did afterwards affirm. This Informant
further saith that one of the constables etc. with some others being
sent by order of Mr. Mayor, to bring the said Grace unto the Town-hall
of Biddiford, immediately, as soon as they had brought the said Grace
unto the Town-hall, the said Susanna turned about and looked upon
this informant, and forthwith the Informant was taken in a very sad
condition as he was coming up the stairs of the said Town-hall, before
the Mayor and Justices, insomuch that he cried out, "Wife, I am now
bewitched by this Devil Susanna Edwards."

The Examination of Mary Trembles of Biddiford, single woman, taken July
18th, 1682. The said Examinant being brought before us and accused
for practising of witchcraft upon the body of Grace Barnes, wife of
George Barnes, of Biddiford, yeoman, was demanded by as how long she
had practised witchcraft, said and confessed, that about three years
last past, one Susanna Edwards of Biddiford, widow, did inform her,
that if she would do as the said Susanna did, that this Examinant
should do very well. Whereupon this Examinant did yield unto the said
Susanna Edwards, and said that she would do as the said Susanna did;
and this Examinant further confesseth that the said Susanna Edwards did
promise that this Examinant should neither want for money, drink, nor
clothes. And further confesseth that after she had made this bargain
with Susanna Edwards, that the Devil in the shape of a Lyon (as she
conceived) did come to this Examinant--and that he did suck her, and
that his sucking was so hard as to cause her to cry out for the pain
thereof. And further confesseth that on Tuesday in Easter week, which
was 18th of May last, she, this Examinant did go about the town of
Biddiford, to beg some bread, and in her walk, she did meet with the
said Susanna Edwards, who asked this Examinant where she had been. Unto
whom this Examinant answered, that she had been about the town, and
had begged some meat, but could get none. Whereupon this Examinant,
together with the said Susanna, did go to the said John Barnes' house,
in hope that there they should have some meat. But the said John
Barnes not being within his house, they could get no meat or bread,
being denied by the said Grace Barnes and her servants, who would not
give them any meat. Whereupon the said Susanna Edwards did bid this
Examinant to go to the said John Barnes' house again, for a farthing's
worth of tobacco. Whereupon this Examinant did go, but could not have
any: whereof this Examinant did acquaint the said Susanna, who then
said that it should be better for the said Grace if she had let this
Examinant have had some tobacco. And further confesseth, that on the
16th of this instant, she the said Susanna, did go to the said John
Barnes house, and went into the fore door, invisibly into the room,
where they did pinch and prick the said Grace Barnes almost unto death;
and that she saw the said John Barnes in bed with his wife, on the
inner side of the bed. And saith and confesseth, that on the 16th inst.
as she was going towards the common bakehouse, she, with the help of
the Devil, would have killed the said Grace Barnes, if that she, this
examinant, had not spilt some of the meat she was then carrying to the
bakehouse.

The examination of Susanna Edwards, of Biddiford, widow, taken 18th
of July A.D. 1682. The said Examinant being brought before us, and
accused of practising witchcraft upon the body of Grace Barnes, wife of
John Barnes of Biddiford, yeoman, was demanded by us how long she had
discourse or familiarity with the Devil; saith, that about two years
ago, she did meet with a gentleman in a field called the Parsonage
Close, in the town of Biddiford, and saith, that his apparel was all
of black. Upon which she did hope to have a piece of money of him.
Whereupon the gentleman drawing near unto this examinant, she did
make a curchy or courtesy unto him, as used to do to gentlemen. Being
demanded what and who the said gentleman, she spake of was, the said
examinant answered, that it was the Devil. And confessed that the Devil
did ask of her, whether she was a poor woman? Unto whom she answered,
that she was a poor woman; and that thereupon the Devil, in the shape
of the gentleman, did say unto her, that if this examinant would grant
him one request, that she should neither want for meat, drink, nor
clothes: whereupon this examinant did say unto the said gentleman (or
rather the Devil) "In the name of God, what is it that I shall have?"
Upon which the said gentleman vanished clear away from her. And further
confesseth, that afterwards there was something in the shape of a
little boy, which she thinks to be the Devil, came into her house, and
did lie with her and that he did suck at her breast. And confesseth
that she did afterwards meet him in a place called Stanbridge Lane,
in this parish of Biddiford leading towards Abbotsham (which is the
next parish on the west of Biddiford) where he did suck blood out of
her breast. And further confesseth that on Sunday the 16th inst., this
Examinant together with Mary Trembles, did go unto the house of John
Barnes, and that nobody did see them; and that they were in the same
room where Grace the wife of the John Barnes was, and that they did
prick and pinch the said Grace Barnes with their fingers, and put her
to great pain and torment, insomuch that the said Grace was almost
dead. And confesseth, that this present day, she did prick and torment
the said Grace Barnes again (intimating with her fingers how she did
it). And also confesseth that the Devil did entice her to make an end
of the said Grace: and that he told her he would come again to her once
more. And confesseth, that she can go to any place invisible, and yet
her body shall be lying in her bed. And further confesseth, that the
Devil hath appeared to her in the shape of a Lyon, as she supposed.
Being demanded whether she had done any bodily hurt unto any other
person beside the said Grace Barnes, saith and confesseth, that she did
prick and torment Dorcas Coleman, wife of John Coleman of Biddiford,
mariner. And saith that she gave herself to the Devil, when she did
meet him in Stambridge Lane as aforesaid. And saith, that the said
Mary Trembles was a servant to her, this examinant, in like manner as
she this examinant was a servant to the Devil (whom she called by the
appellation of a gentleman).

 _Examined with the original whereof this is a true copy._

 Thomas Gist.   _Mayor._
 John Davies.   _Alderman._
 John Hill.     _Town Clerk._

The substance of the last words and confession of Susanna Edwards,
Temperance Lloyd, and Mary Trembles, at the time and place of their
execution, Aug. 25, 1682, as fully as could be taken in a case liable
to be so much noise and confusion as is usual on such occasions.

_Mr. H._ Mary Trembles, what have you to say as to the crime you are to
die for?

_Mary._ I have spoken as much as I can speak already, and can speak no
more.

_H._ In what shape did the Devil come to you?

_Mary._ The Devil came to me once, I think like a Lyon.

_H._ Did he offer violence to you?

_Mary._ No, not at all: but did frighten me, and did nothing to me; and
I cried to God and asked what he would have, and he vanished.

_H._ Did he give thee any gift, or did'st thou make him any promises?

_Mary._ No.

_H._ Did he ever make use of thy body?

_M._ Never in my life.

_H._ Have you a secret teat?

_M._ None. (The grand inquest said it was sworn to them.)

_H._ Mary Trembles, was not the Devil there with Susan, when I was
once in prison with you, and under her coats? the other told me he was
there, but is now fled; and that the Devil was in the way when I was
going to Taunton with my son, who is a Minister? Thou speakest now as a
dying woman, and as the Psalmist says, "I will confess my iniquities,
and acknowledge all my sins." We find that Mary Magdalene had seven
Devils: and she came to Christ and had mercy, and if thou break thy
league with the Devil, and make a covenant with God, thou may'st also
obtain mercy. If thou hast anything to speak, speak thy mind?

_Mary._ I have spoken the very truth and can speak no more: Mr. H. I
would desire that they may come by me, and confess as I have done.

_H._ Temperance Lloyd. Have you made any contract with the Devil?

_T._ No.

_H._ Did he ever take any of thy blood?

_T._ No.

_H._ How did he appear to thee at the first, or where, in the street?
In what shape?

_T._ In a wonderful shape.

_H._ Had he ever any carnal knowledge of thee?

_T._ No, never.

_H._ What did he do when he came to thee?

_T._ He caused me to go and do harm.

_H._ And did you go?

_T._ I did hurt a woman sore against my conscience: he carried me up to
her door, which was open: The woman's name was Mrs. Grace Thomas.

_H._ What caused you to do harm? What Malice had you against her? and
did she do you any harm?

_T._ No, she never did me any harm: but the Devil beat me about the
head grievously, because I would not kill her: but I did bruise her
after this fashion (laying her two hands to her side).

_H._ Did you bruise her till the blood came out of her nose and mouth?

_T._ No.

_H._ How many did you destroy and hurt?

_T._ None but she.

_H._ Did you know any mariners that you or your associates destroyed by
overturning of ships or boats?

_T._ No. I never hurt any ship, bark, or boat in my life.

_H._ Was it you or Susan that did bewitch the children?

_T._ I sold apples, and the child took an apple from me, and the
mother took the apple from the child, for which I was very angry; but
the child died of small-pox.

_H._ Did you know one Mr. Lutteris about these parts, or any of your
confederates? Did you or them bewitch his child?

_T._ No.

_H._ Temperance, how did you come to hurt Mrs. Grace Thomas? Did you
pass through the keyhole of the door or was the door open?

_T._ The Devil did lead me up stairs, and the door was open, and this
is all the hurt I did.

_H._ How did you know it was the Devil?

_T._ I knew it by his eyes.

_H._ Had you no discourse or treaty with him?

_T._ No. He said I should go along with him to destroy a woman, and I
told him I would not. He said he would make me: and then he beat me
about the head.

_H._ Why did you not call upon God?

_T._ He would not let me do it.

_H._ You say you never hurt ships or boats; did you never ride over an
arm of the sea on a cow?

_T._ No. No, Master: 'twas she (meaning Susan), when Temperance said
"'twas she," she said "she lied" and that she was the cause of bringing
her to die "for she cried when she was first brought to gaol, if that
she was hanged, she would have me hanged too; she reported I should
ride on a cow before her, which I never did."

_H._ Susan, did you see the shape of a bullock? At the first time of
your examination you said it was like a short black man about the
length of your arm?

_Susan._ He was black, Sir.

_H._ Susan, had you any knowledge of the bewitching of Mrs. Lutteris'
child, or did you know a place called Trunta Burroughs?

_S._ No.

_H._ Are you willing to have any prayers? Then Mr. H. prayed, whose
prayer we could not take, and they sung part of the 40th Psalm at the
desire of Susan Edwards. As she mounted the ladder, she said, "The Lord
Jesus speed me: though my sins be red as scarlet, the Lord Jesus can
make them as white as snow, the Lord help my soul." Then was executed.

Mary Tremble said, "Lord Jesus, receive my soul! Lord Jesus, speed me!"
and then was also executed. Temperance Lloyd said, "Jesus Christ, speed
me well! Lord, forgive all my sins! Lord Jesus Christ, be merciful to
my poor soul."

Mr. Sheriff. You are looked on as the woman that hath debauched the
other two. Did you ever lie with the Devil?

_T._ No.

_Sh._ Did you know of their coming to gaol?

_T._ No.

_Sh._ Have you anything to say to satisfy the world?

_T._ I forgive them as I desire the Lord Jesus will forgive me. The
greatest thing that I did was Mrs. Grace Thomas; and I desire I may
be sensible of it, and that the Lord Jesus Christ may forgive me. The
Devil met me in the street and bid me kill her, and because I would
not, he beat me about the head and back.

_Sh._ In what shape or colour was he?

_T._ In black like a bullock.

_Sh._ How do you know you did it? how went you in thro' the keyhole or
the Door?

_T._ At the Door?

_Sh._ Had you no discourse with the Devil?

_T._ Never but this day six weeks.

_Sh._ You were charged about twelve years since, and did you never see
the Devil but about this time?

_T._ Yes, once before. I was going for brooms; and he came to me and
said, "This poor woman has a great burthen, and would help ease me of
my burthen;" and I said, "The Lord had enabled me to carry it so far,
and I hope I shall be able to carry it further."

_Sh._ Did the Devil never promise you any thing?

_T._ No. Never.

_Sh._ Then you have served a very bad master, who gave you nothing.
Well, consider you are just departing this world: do you believe there
is a God?

_T._ Yes.

_Sh._ Do you believe in Jesus Christ?

_T._ Yes, and I pray Jesus Christ to pardon all my sins. And so was
executed.




APPENDIX.--No. II.

Copied from a 4to published Tract in the Library of the British Museum.


 THE TRYAL, CONDEMNATION, AND EXECUTION OF THREE WITCHES; VIZ.
 TEMPERANCE FLOYD, MARY FLOYD, & SUSANNA EDWARDS.

 Who were arraigned at Exeter on the 18th of August, 1682, & being
 proved guilty of witchcraft were condemned to be hanged, which was
 accordingly Executed in the view of many spectators, whose strange and
 much to be lamented Impudence is never to be forgotten.

 Also how they Confessed what Mischiefs they had done by the assistance
 of the Devil, who lay with the above named Temperance Floyd nine
 nights together. Also how they squeezed one Hannah Thomas to death
 in their arms. How they also caused several ships to be cast away,
 causing a boy to fall from the top of a main-mast into the sea.

 WITH MANY WONDERFULL THINGS WORTH YOUR READING.

 Printed for F. Deacon, at the Sign of the Rainbow, a little beyond St.
 Andrew's Church, in Holborn. 1682.

The Tryal, Condemnation, and Execution of three witches who were
Arraigned at Exeter on the 18th of August, 1682.

Let not my assertion seem strange to the Ingenious Reader, who seems
to affirm this (by some incredulous) story, concerning the subsequent
matter; nor will I trouble you with a long prologue to stir you to
believe that which so many letters have verified, concerning the matter
in hand, but so it was.

The Assizes being held at Exon (alias) Exeter, on the 18th of August,
1682. It happened that there was three persons Arraigned for witchcraft
whose names take as followeth, (viz.) Temperance Floyd, Mary Floyd,
and Susannah Edwards, all dwelling in one town, in the aforesaid
County of Devon, namely Bideford, by some called Bythford, all three
being stricken in years, which might have taught them more grace;
but Man's Enemy, Soul's destroyer, and the author of wickedness so
prevailed with them that they made an Interchange accepting a Hell for
an Heaven, rather willing to please the Devil than the Great Creator
whose smiles are more precious than refined Gold, the loss of whose
love is no less than Everlasting Destruction. These I say, these poor
souls (aiming at nothing but ruin) embrace folly instead of wisdom,
present pleasure for eternal pain; take Flames for Crowns, Misery for
Happiness, change God for a Devil and a soul for Hell. It is so much
to be lamented that these persons should take delight in nothing
more than to Converse with Devils, who reason tells seeks nothing but
Destruction, God's dishonour, and Man's overthrow, to (if it were
possible) empty Heaven and fill Hell. I come now to the particulars.
The aforesaid Persons whose names are already inserted came to their
Tryal having been sometime before accused of Witchcraft, and for that
cause Imprisonment; when they came to the Bar, their indictment was
read, and though the Devil had so much power over them, yet they had
not Impudence enough to deny what they were accused for: Intemperate
Temperance Floyd, who was the eldest of the three, pleaded to the
indictment, and owned the accusation, acknowledging she had been in
league with the Devil 20 years and upwards, and that in the term of
those years she had been guilty of many cruelties, and by Hellish
power afflicted both Man and Beast; but now to the other Two who were
instructed in that Damnable art of Witchcraft by the above named
Temperance Floyd, they acknowledged that they had served five years
with her to learn her accursed art, and during the term of those years
they saw and were acquainted with many wonderful and unlawful tricks.
For they owned that they had not been idle in their Hellish practices,
but had served him faithfully, who will reward them gratefully for
their Diabolical Indulgence. We have an account of some of their
Wicked, Inhuman, Accursed, Damnable, and Preposterous action. But let
us chiefly mind the Eldest and worst of these Three, namely Temperance
Floyd. Let her be the substance of our matter, who was the introducer
and cause of the other two's overthrow. These wicked wretches being all
of one mind, at last began to exercise their Devilish Arts, and upon
one Mr. Hann, a minister in those parts; a person of good repute and
Honest Conversation, who sought his soul's eternal happiness, while
they designed their everlasting Ruin. These Hellish agents intended
Mischief and misery to the person of Mr. Hann: but the overruling Power
prevented them; but because they could not be suffered to exercise
their Diabolicism upon his body, they thought they would be some other
way Revenged, so witch like, they laid their Diabolical Charms upon his
cattle, so that those cows that used to give milk, when they came to
be milked they gave blood, to the great astonishment of the milkers;
but finding themselves outcast from everlasting happiness, they grew
insolent in their Cursed Conceits, resolving to make use of that art
which they should so deadly pay for. But I too much insist upon the Old
hag whose cruelties are and were sufficiently manifested by her own
confession at her Tryal, the other Two witches being somewhat younger
than the Old Shape of Prince Lucifer, who acknowledged themselves to
have been servants to the Old one for five years to learn the art
and mystery of Hellish, Damnable, Accursed and Most to be Lamented
Witchcraft; and in the term of these 5 years grew to be as dexterous
as their Devilish Tutor, trying their experiments upon Man and Beast
to the injury of both, but the Old one confessed plainly that she had
caused several Ships at sea to be cast away, with loss of many men's
lives and the prejudice of many others. She confessed also that the
Devil lay carnally with her for Nine Nights together, and that she had
Paps about her an Inch long, which the Devil us'd to suck to Provoke
her to Letchery; but the other two seemed to be more Pensive than
she, for they confessed that she was the Introducer of their Misery,
and that they had served both the Devil and her five years' slavery,
to understand the ready way to everlasting Destruction. But Heaven's
Vengeance never fails to follow such offenders who do wickedly,
presumptuously and prophanely make use of the Devil to satisfy their
Impious wills. But to proceed, this old witch whose name was Temperance
Floyd, was without doubt perfectly Resolute, not minding what should
become of her Immortal soul, but rather Impudently owned at, as well as
after her Tryal, so Audacious, that she had done many wicked Exploits
by the Power (not virtue) of her Hellish Discipline: She confessed that
she had been Instrumental to the Death of several, namely one Hannah
Thomas, by pretence of love, Squeezing her in her arms so long till the
blood gushed out of her mouth; she confessed that she and the other
two had been the death of Two more, besides several others that they
had lamed by their Hellish Art; they confessed that they had been the
destruction of many cattle, both small and great, and many more things
too tedious to relate; being asked at their trial to say the Lord's
Prayer, they answered, that they could not except it were backwards;
they said the Devil used to be with them on Nights in Several Shapes,
sometimes like a Hound, who Hunted before them (but without doubt he
hunted for Souls). There were many more accusations laid against them,
which they all owned (except one) which was about causing a ship to
be sunk, and a boy that fell from the Topmast of another ship and so
broke his neck or as some say Drowned in the Sea. It being asked how
long they had been in league with the Devil, one of them said twenty
years she had been his Familiar Acquaintance, the other two were of
lesser standing, but long enough to Ruin their Precious Souls. They
also Asserted that the Devil came with them to the Prison Door, and
there left them much like what he is, the Author of Lies, the Inventor
of Mischief, the Betrayer of Souls, the unsatisfied deceiver and God's
Enemy. All these things being Confessed by their own Tongues, it is not
strange to think that Judgment past upon them regularly in such cases.
But now to proceed. As to the manner of their Deportment going to the
place of Execution. It is certainly affirmed the old witch Temperance
Floyd went all the way Eating and was seemingly unconcerned, but Mary
Floyd was very obstinate, and would not go, but lay down, insomuch
that they forc'd to tye her on a horse's back, for she was very loath
to receive her deserved Doom. But when they came to the place of
Execution, they desired the Minister to pray for them, and that part of
the 40th Psalm might be sung; which was accordingly done, and presently
after the Executioner did his office.

Thus have you heard of the wicked life and Miserable death of three
Gross Offenders, who slighted God's Commandments, despised a Christ
and embraced a Devil, lost Heaven to purchase Hell, at the dear rate
of their Immortal Souls. Let this then be a caution for all Sinners
to forsake Sin and Satan, whose end and design is to ruin Souls, to
enslave Mortals, and without doubt, were it possible, to pull God's
Almighty Majesty out of his everlasting Throne. 'Tis great pitty that
some have so little esteem of their Jewels which Jesus Christ the Son
of the Almighty, purchased at so dear a rate, yet vile Sinners never
call to mind, or at least very seldom, what Labyrinths of Misery they
involve themselves in, how they crush Christ, and how they wound his
already wounded side for sinners: But now to conclude, take a poor
sinners advice, walk uprightly and justly, and let not the fruition
of present enjoyment, cause you to neglect Eternal Happiness, the
enjoyments of which is beyond Expression and the loss thereof Eternal
Misery, Destruction, and Ruin.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Devonshire Witches, by Paul Karkeek

